---
title: "Today we learn"
date: 2019-06-10
tags: []

---

![hacking](https://developers.giphy.com/static/img/giphy_search.c240015597a9.gif)

I've been writing web code and publishing without permission since I
could reach a keyboard. I've built dozens of web-apps and web sites,
some of which were wildly successful, and many of which were not.  Plus
One reached over a million users. Zivity and Feed Me Links were each in
the dozens of thousands of active and paying customers. Yet despite all
this web work, my understanding of the web was always fuzzy and
incomplete, built in bits and pieces, never honed against any curriculum
or test or school, since none existed when i started learning.

As I grew up in skills, my title kept getting upgraded, from Engineer to
Senior Engineer to Manager to Director and so on. After being an
Engineering Director (and Creative Director) for a long enough while,
with my days filled mostly with meetings and planning and translation
between all the lays of the human stack, my front-end skills stopped
getting the regular care and feeding they craved.

At the same time as I was doing managerial and leadership stuff around
design and technology at our startup, the pace of the web, amazingly,
accelerated dramatically. Within a few years, several new web standards
appeared, and then exploded, or at least that's how it felt. Seemingly
overnight, suddenly, CSS Grid and Flexbox were actually *here*, as
usable in real browsers. Single page apps (SPA), powered by Ember.js,
and then Angular, and then React happened. Vue.js happened. Aided in
part by the heroic work of the V8 team's work making Javascript fast and
portable, Node and the general Javascript renaissance, happened.

Suddenly, one day you wake up, and Microsoft, the web's biggest cartoon
villain, is cool again? Now everyone's using VS Code (rebranded from
Visual Studio Code). "GitHub, a Microsoft product"? What the actual huh?

Suddenly, in a fractally expanding world of new technology, my
wizard-like web developer stylings weren't so wizardly. I went from
being a full-stack web developer dangerous in 3 web frameworks to
someone who felt baffled looking at the source of any modern website.

I missed being the only one in the building who knows the exact curl
command that will tee off 30% of live production API traffic to the dev
build. I pined for the days when I could offhandedly diagnose issues with
the cantankerous distributed content management system I'd built using
an obscure functional language not meant for production use.

I missed the rush of feeling smart (alternated with
feelings of total frustration and idiocy) interleaved with the
opportunity to completely lose oneself in an abstract world free from
the messy problems of real life. And really, whether or not my next job
even requires being able to tear a website down the rocker-panels and
rebuild it, why not regain the ability to do so?

So, yeah. Let's do it.

<!--
Last Friday I quit my job as co-founder running product at a pre-launch
venture-backed startup. The project had the potential to become an
interesting business, but I've never been farther apart in values than I
was with the co-founder who recruited me, to the point that working
together was actually impossible.
-->

I'm starting this project in June and I have a family trip to Michigan
in two months, so that gives me a rare, firm window of time between the
job I just left and whatever comes next. So this, then, is a daily log
of my 2019 summer mission: to upgrade my desultory, slapdash front-end
web development skills to a uniform, 2019, level, to the point that I
can teach others and build whatever I want.

Here we go.
